# Msc_thesis
This repository is used to store the code and data used throughout the work of my Msc Thesis. This is a partial requirement to earn the MSc Degree in Data Science and Advanced Analytics from NOVA IMS.

ABSTRACT
In the digital era, learning management systems are essential intermediaries between students and educational content. Among other factors, the institutional adoption of such systems is meant to foster student engagement and lead to better educational outcomes in a scalable manner. However, a significant challenge facing educators and institutions is the timely identification of students who may require special attention and feedback. Early identification of students allows educators to provide necessary feedback and adopt suitable corrective measures. Therefore, a significant body of research has been dedicated to developing early warning systems with clickstream data. However, comprehensive studies that attempt prediction on multiple courses are few and far between. Moreover, most predictive models require sophisticated domain knowledge, data skills and computational power that may not be available in practice. In this work, we used an academic year's worth of data collected from all courses at a portuguese information management school to perform two main experiments on two binary classification problems: the first being students at risk vs students not at risk and the second being high-performing students vs not high-performing students. 
In the first experiment, we compared the performances obtained with traditional machine learning classifiers against majority class classifiers at multiple stages of course completion (more specifically, the 10%, 25%, 33%, 50% and 100% course completion thresholds). For both classification problems, performances on all metrics peaked when using all of the data collected throughout the course – 88.6% accuracy and 92.3% Area Under the Receiver Operating Characteristic (AUROC) using Random Forest (RF) for students at risk and 78.2% accuracy and 79.6% AUROC using ExtraTrees for high-performing students. With respect to early prediction, acceptable performances for classifying students at risk are achieved as early as the 25% course duration threshold (72.8% AUROC using RF). Performances for high-performing students were generally lower, with AUROC at earlier stages peaking at the courses’ midway point (64.4% AUROC using RF). Our second experiment deployed long-short term memory units (LSTM) trained with a time-dependent representation of a single feature (number of total clicks). While this approach achieved inferior performances, we argue that the more straightforward data pre-processing of this approach may represent a worthwhile tradeoff against relatively small losses in model performance, especially at earlier moments of prediction. To predict students at risk, we found the best tradeoff at 33% course duration – 64% AUROC against 74% AUROC using RF. To predict high-performing students, we found the best tradeoff to occur at 25% course duration (56% AUROC against 61% using RF). 
Results obtained using a different set of logs validate the portability of our approach when it comes to static aggregate models. However, our deep learning approach did not generalize well on this data, which suggests that portability between courses using this approach may only be possible in specific instances.   
